 

Pine Tree Rifle Club 

Rimfire Benchrest League 

 Rules and Procedures 

(2024) 

Article I. Officials: 

1. League Director (Ken Benton in 2024) 
The League Director is responsible for organizing and conducting league meetings, securing 
volunteers for league duties, reviewing and updating league rules and procedures, establishing 
the season schedule, developing a culture of safety on the rifle range, publishing forms and 
documents related to league registration and league membership, orienting league members as 
to the course of fire, firearm classifications, practice and scoring relays, fees, rules changes, 
qualifications for various classifications, targets, and for providing leadership and oversight 
when addressing financial items related to the league. 
2. Financial Officer 
The Financial Officer is assigned the responsibility of collecting league dues, match fees, 
including 50/50 raffles, keeping records of all revenue, providing periodic financial updates to 
the League Director, and submitting all monies to the PTRC. 
3. Rules Committee Chairman 
The Rules Committee Chairman is responsible for recruiting a committee for interpreting 
League Rules and Procedures as well as proposing amendments to Leagues Rules as required. 
The committee is responsible for ruling on any disputes not resolved by the scorers or 
referees. A minimum of three committee members is recommended for resolving any 
disputes. 
4. Chief Range Officer (Steven H Riach in 2024) 
Establishes safety protocols for the RBL as well as other range activities of the Pine Tree 
Rifle Club. 
5. Range Safety Officers 
Range Safety Officers (RSO’s) are persons who have completed the RSO training course and 
are responsible for inspecting the firing line throughout a match as well as identifying and 
responding to issues during a match. A minimum of two Range Safety Officers is 
recommended for a match. An RSO may enlist the assistance of a range officer to make safety 
commands and other assistants as deemed necessary. 
6. Range Officer 
To assist the RSO, a Range Officer may be appointed by the RSO to make announcements, 
give range commands, etc. on the public address system. 
7. Referees 
Referees are responsible for inspecting competitors’ equipment at their discretion for 
compliance to League Rules and for ruling on any disputes arising from the conduct of a 
match. The RSO shall appoint a minimum of three (3) referees. 
8. Scorers 
Scorers are responsible for scoring all targets, rule on the value of all shots, rule on crossfires 
and any other irregularities, and rule on any protests or complaints concerning scoring. 
Scorers will make every effort to collaborate with other scorers on any questionable or close 
shot. 
9. Statistician 
The Statistician is responsible for compiling, publishing, correcting, and maintaining scores 
for the season. The Statistician will provide updates on a weekly basis as well as final scores 
at the conclusion of the season. 
10. Target Coordinator 
The Target Coordinator will be responsible for maintaining target inventories, labeling 
targets, collecting fees for target sales as well as preparing and distributing targets for match 
competition. 
11. Target Crew Director 
The Target Crew Director is responsible for recruiting members for target frame setup and 
breakdown as well as familiarizing volunteers as to the proper placement and spacing of the 
target frames. Occasional target frame repair may be necessary. 
12. Equipment Judges 
Three equipment judges shall be appointed by the League Director to classify all rifles 


Article II. League Participation: 

1. PTRC Members 
Participation in the Rimfire League and eligibility for place finishes and awards is limited to 
members in good standing with the PTRC.
2. PTRC Candidate Members 
Any PTRC membership candidate who has completed and submitted a PTRC Membership 
Application, paid the $10.00 application fee, and has been placed on the Membership Waiting 
List is also eligible to participate in the Rimfire League. 
3. Guests 
To encourage others to join the PTRC and become Rimfire League members, non-PTRC 
members are invited as guests to participate in individual matches, but no more than three (3) 
matches total during the RFL season. Each guest must be sponsored by a Rimfire League 
member in good standing. Guests are not eligible for awards. 
4. League Entry Fees 
Rimfire League entry fees shall be paid prior to the end of activities for any participant’s first 
record match (not necessarily the first scheduled match) unless there are extenuating 
circumstances accepted by the League Director. Rimfire League Dues are $45.00 Junior Members $25.00
5. Multiple Class Entries 
Shooters may participate in multiple class entries for which they qualify. League fees for an 
additional class entry is $10.00. This fee shall be paid prior to the end of activities for the 
participant’s first record match in the additional class. 
6. League Vesting 
Final scores and place finishes will be based on the ten (10) best target scores registered 
during the season for each class. There will be between 16 and 18 scored matches held during 
the season. The registration/orientation/practice session does not count.


Article III. Classification and Advancement 

1. Classification Codes 
Classes contested include: Master Target Class (MTC), Target Class (TC), Marksman Class 
(MKC), Master Sporter Class (MSC), Sporter Class (SC), and Open Iron Sights Class (OIS). 
Classes are based on the firearm used and not the past performance of the competitor. 
2. Classification Objectives 
The objective of providing different classes within the PTRC Rimfire League (RFL) is to: 
a. Create a sense of equity and fairness amongst competitors based on firearms used. 
b. Foster a competitive spirit and an atmosphere of enjoyment and collegiality amongst 
competitors such that each competitor has the opportunity to further develop and improve 
their shooting skills. 
c. Eliminate any forced reclassification of shooters as long as the same class of rifle is used. 
3. Classifying Rifles 
a. All rifles shall be submitted to the Equipment Judges to determine the classification of 
the rifle prior to a shooter’s first official match. If there is a disagreement amongst the 
Equipment Judges, a simple majority will establish the classification. If there is no simple 
majority, the League Director shall make the final determination of the classification. 
b. Shooters may register more than one rifle to the Equipment Judges during the 
competition season; however, to remain in the same classification, the rifle must meet the 
same standards as the original rifle. 
c. Decisions of the Equipment Judges are final once classified. 
d. Pistols/Revolvers may be used in lieu of rifles and shall be classified by the Equipment 
Judges. 
4. Advancement 
There shall be no forced change in classification once established by the Equipment Judges. 
Competitors, however, may elect to fire in a more challenging class (for example, a 
competitor may use a “Target Class” rifle in the Master Target or Advanced Master Target 
class.) See “Switching Classes” and “Declaring Classes” below. 

 

Article IV. Participation and Eligibility. 

1. Declaring Class 
Competitors should clearly identify which class or classes they are going to compete in either 
at the registration-practice session in late April or prior to the first record match the 
competitor participates in. This is to ensure that scoring documents are processed correctly 
and the competitor is issued the appropriate score target. 
2. Switching Classes 
Switching to another class is permitted as long as the shooter is qualified. If the shooter elects 
to switch to another class, the shooter must inform the League Director and Statistician before 
changing. This change should occur prior to the Week 9 score match to ensure that the shooter 
has the opportunity to complete 10 score targets for league vesting. Scores from the previous 
class will be disqualified. The shooter will also be responsible for making sure his/her targets 
are appropriately marked before firing. 
3. Disqualifications 
Scores fired on the incorrect target for the class declared will be disqualified. Targets 
submitted with the incorrect date, classification or competitor name may be disqualified if the 
scorers cannot determine the correct marking. Each competitor is responsible for firing on and 
submitting a correct and appropriately-marked target. 
4. Making Up Matches 
Competitors are not permitted to double up on scoring relays to make-up for previously 
missed matches. Sixteen score matches are provided for each competitor to become vested 
in the best ten score matches successfully completed and submitted. 

 

Article V. Course of Fire and Targets 

1. Course of Fire 
The Course of Fire shall be 25 shots for record, plus unlimited sighters at 50 yards in 30 
minutes. 
2. Targets 
 The targets used by each class are: 
e. Open Iron Sights Class NRA 50 A-23/6 target. 
f. Sporter Class PTRC Sporter 100 target. 
g. Master Sporter Class PTRC Sporter 100 target. 
h. Marksman Class IBS 50 Yard target. 
i. Target Class IBS 50 Yard target. 
j. Master Target Class IBS 50 Yard target. 


Article VI. Equipment 

1. Firearms 
a. For all classes, Cable-release triggers are not permitted. Muzzle attachments or 
modifications which direct gas to the side or backwards are not permitted. Release 
triggers are not permitted. 
b. For Open-Iron Sight class, no telescopic sights are permitted, but a single corrective lens 
attached to the rear sight is permitted. 
c. For Sporter Classes, attachments to the stock fore-end such as wide flat plates are not 
permitted. “Tuners” are not permitted. 
d. For Target and Master Target classes, attachments to the stock fore-ends that do not 
exceed 3” in width ARE permitted, “tuners,” “bloop tubes,” and the like fixed to factory-
supplied barrels ARE permitted. Aftermarket triggers ARE permitted, Aftermarket and 
extensively-modified stocks ARE permitted insofar as the 3” wide fore-end limit is not 
exceeded.. 
e. Handguns as per New York State’s definition may be used in lieu of rifles. 
2. Scopes 
a. Telescopic sights of any magnification may be used in all but the Open-Iron Sight 
Class. 
b. Laser optics are not permitted 
3. Ammunition 
Only .22 short, long or long rifle ammunition firing a single projectile is allowed. Tracer 
rounds are not permitted. 
4. Rests 
a. Rifles shall be fired from pliable sandbags, both front and rear. Adjustable pedestals 
supporting the front sandbags placed under forearms are permitted. Boxes or blocks used 
to raise sandbags to get proper elevation are permitted. Such boxes, blocks or rests may 
not be attached to the bench tops with clamps, wood screws, nails or other similar 
hardware. 
b. One-piece rests, wherein the structure supporting the fore-end is connected to the 
structure supporting the butt stock are not permitted. Machines or other rests that can 
return a rifle to battery or retard recoil are not permitted. 
c. Bipods attached to a rifle’s fore-end, in conjunction with a sandbag supporting the butt 
stock (optional) may be used in lieu of standard rests. 
d. Backpacks, blankets, and other improvised rests are permitted as long as they are placed 
directly upon the shooting bench and don’t retard recoil and/or circumvent return-to-
battery prohibition. 
5. Flags 
Wind flags of any size may be placed on the range by competitors. 
a. The top of the flag shall be no higher than the line between the highest point of the bench 
top to the bottom of the target card. 
b. Except for provision (c) below, personal wind flags will be restricted to within the 
competitive shooting lane of the competitor placing the flags. A shooting lane is defined 
as the centerlines between benches to the centerline between the target cards unique to 
each competitor. 
c. During any scoring match, competitors may place personal wind flags off to the side of 
the range: that is left of the left-most bench being used on the range, and/or right of the 
right-most bench being used on the range. 
d. If, after the match is started, a flag is causing an obstruction for any shooter, the range 
officer shall call a “cease-fire” and direct a Range Safety Officer (RSO) to lay the flag 
and pole in question down on the ground. 
e. Unique to our Rimfire League, competitors will have the opportunity to set-up, adjust, or 
collect their personal wind flags between practice or scoring relays. 
f. The use of electronic wind gauges or similar devices is not permitted. 
g. Miniature wind flags place on the bench tops as well as ribbon tassels no longer than 12 
inches long placed above the benches is permitted. 


Article VII. Match Operations 

1. Bench Selection 
a. Shooters shall be briefed concerning the rotational schedule system of the rimfire league 
at registration/practice day, and if necessary, any time thence forward. 
b. Shooters will select an available starting bench (first come-first served basis) on the first 
day they participate in an official Score Match. 
c. Shooters who start after the first Score Match must gain approval from the League 
Chairman when adding their name(s) to the rotational system. 
d. Based on the initial selection of a bench, the shooter will follow the rotational schedule 
provided for the rest of the season regardless of the Score Relay they are in. 
e. Shooters will advance six benches each week. 
f. Shooters must honor and recognize the advancement schedule even if they are absent on 
any given week. 
g. No shooter will be permitted to substitute in on a bench rotation for an absent shooter. 
The league chairman may give consideration, however, to guest shooters, scoring 
officials, target coordinators, range announcers, and board members on nights of 
meetings. Special consideration may also be given to shooters on any match that falls on 
a holiday, whereas, a shooter may request to use an open, adjacent bench during Relay 1 
so that they can leave early for another commitment. The League Chairman will always 
have the final say in these matters. 
h. The rotational schedule will be available in both the Range Office (where the targets are 
stored) and the Range Master Station (where announcements are made). 
i. Up to two shooters will be assigned to each bench. A gentleman’s agreement will decide 
the Relay each shooter participates in. All scoring officials, range announcers, target 
coordinators, and board members should be given special considerations for Relay 
j. Alternating relays or flip-of-the-coin could serve as a solution for the general 
membership. 
a. Shooters may officially set-up their equipment starting at 3:00 pm. Please recognize all 
range and league firearm safety rules and procedures. 
b. Vehicles may unload and load equipment at the drop-off area, but everyone must park in 
the grassy knoll area located above the road behind the range platform. There will be “No 
Parking along the Range Platform.” 
c. Handicapped shooters will have Range Carts they can use to transport their firearms and 
equipment to their assigned benches. 
d. Range Safety Officers should be available to assist handicapped shooters during the 
transitions. 
e. Shooters shall ensure that all firearms are unloaded during transport to and from the firing 
line. It is recommended that gun cases be used. 
a. Each participant is responsible for obtaining their own properly labeled Score Target from 
the Target Coordinator. 
b. Each participant is responsible for posting and retrieving their own target. 
c. Each participant is responsible for securing and submitting their own Score Target to the 
RSO (Range Master) at the conclusion of each Scoring Relay. 
d. Any Score target suspected of being tampered with prior to submission to the RSO may be 
subject to disqualification. 
2. Parking and Set-Up 
3. Target Posting and Retrieval 
4. Range Commands 
a. The Range Commands established for the PTRC Rimfire Benchrest League are specific 
in content with the Range Command language posted in the Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOP) Manual located in the PTRC Clubhouse Board Room. The Range 
Commands are clear and distinct in purpose designed to encourage and enhance the 
understanding and importance of incorporating safety procedures into benchrest 
competition shooting. 
b. Prior to the Scoring Relay 1, the RSO will ask all competitors to assemble in front of the 
Range Master Station. The RSO may address any concerns identified from previous 
matches as well as update members on shooting related issues. 
c. The Pledge of Allegiance will follow. Shortly thereafter, the RSO or designated range 
officer will announce: “Shooters: To Your Benches.” 
5. Initiating Relay 
a. Shooters be advised that the range is about to go hot. 
b. This is a Scoring Relay. You will have 30 minutes to complete 25 bulls at 50 yards. 
c. A countdown will include: 15 min, 5 min, 2 min, 1 min, 30 sec, and 15 seconds. 
d. In the event of any down range safety issue , anyone may call a “Cease-Fire.” If an 
unsafe situation arises, call a “Cease-Fire” loudly, activate the Range Safety Lights, and 
seek assistance from a Range Safety Officer (RSO). 
e. The RSO will add one (1) minute to everyone’s time as soon as the safety issue is 
resolved. 
f. At this time, no one is to be forward of the benches for any reason. When the Range 
Safety Lights go off, you may load your firearm and commence firing on your target. 
g. Range Safety Officers – Are we ready on the left? Are we ready on the right? 
h. Ready on the firing line – Range Safety Lights are going off – you may now load your 
firearm and commence firing on your target. 
6. During Relay 
a. Prior to the termination of any scoring relay, a shooter may notify a Range Safety Officer 
(RSO) that they have finished early and “request the opportunity” to breakdown their 
equipment and safely remove their firearm from the range. 
b. The RSO must first inspect the firearm and identify that an “Empty Chamber Indicator” 
(ECI) has been correctly inserted indicating that the firearm is safe for removal. 
c. Once the RSO grants permission, the firearm and equipment may be removed in a safe, 
quiet, and non-disruptive manner. 
7. Terminating Relay 
a. Cease-Fire! Cease-Fire! Cease-Fire! 
b. Clear your firearm, insert your ECI (Empty Chamber Indicator), and step to the back of 
your bench. (pause) 
c. Range Safety Officers, please inspect the firearms on the firing line and let me know 
when the range is safe. (RSO’s provide a thumbs up signal-all is safe) 
d. Remember, the Range Safety Lights are still off and no one is to be forward of the 
benches at this time. Shooters-you now have five (5) minutes to safely clear your 
equipment from your benches and new shooters may safely set-up. When approaching 
the bench, be sure that your bolts are pulled or you have an installed an ECI. 
e. (5 minutes later) Shooters be advised that the Range Safety Lights are going on and no 
one is to be handling a firearm at any time. All firearms should have an ECI installed. 
f. Range Safety Officers – please inspect the firing line. 
g. Safe on the right? Safe on the left? 
h. Safe on the firing line – Range Safety Lights are going on – you may now proceed down 
range to post or retrieve your targets and set up your wind flags. 
i. Reminder to all members – please bring your Score Targets to the Range Master Station 
ASAP. 
8. Relay Times: 
3:00 Early Set-Up Target Frames 
4:00 Early Practice Relay 1 
4:30 Early Score Relay 1 
5:00 Late Set-Up 
5:30 Late Practice Relay 2 
5:30 Target Change-Over / Pledge 
6:00 Late Score Relay 2 
6:30 Breakdown Target Frames 


Article VIII. Safety 

1. Standard Safety Procedures 
a. Standard safety rules and procedures remain in effect during matches and practice 
sessions. 
b. All Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for league competitions and general 
membership shooting activities are provided in the SOP Manual located in the clubhouse. 
c. All members and leagues shall strive to develop a “Culture of Safety” on the range 
through communication and exercising proper procedures and actions 
2. Open Actions/Empty Chambers 
a. Having the bolt removed from the action along with magazines from non-bolt action 
firearms is a proper method for securing the safety of the firearm and communicating 
safety to members and Range Officials. 
b. Inserting an Empty Chamber Indicator (ECI) or Chamber Flag is another appropriate 
method for securing the safety of a firearm. 
3. Range Safety Lights 
a. No one is to be handling a firearm when the Range Safety Lights (red) are on. 
b. Range Safety Lights are turned on only after the RSO or designated range officer has 
declared the range to be “Safe” and turns the lights on. Permission will then be granted 
for members to go down range. 
c. Firearms are not allowed to be brought to the firing line or bench platform when the 
Range Safety Lights are on. 
d. Firearms secured in a case may be brought to the bench platform, but must remain in the 
case until the Range Safety Lights go off and the RSO or designated range officer has 
declared “Commence Firing.” 
e. Members may set-up equipment other than their firearm while the Range Safety Lights 
are on. 
f. When the Range Safety Lights go off, no one is to be down range or forward of the 
benches at any time. 
g. Members may safely place their firearms on rests, position them, and commence firing 
once the Range Safety Lights are off and the RSO or designated range officer has 
declared “Commence Firing.” 
h. There will be a five-minute period at the conclusion of each Scoring Relay where the 
Range Safety Lights will remain off. Members may change out their equipment, firearms, 
and benches during this period. No one will be allowed to go down range during this 5-
minute period of time. The RSO or designated range officer has the option of modifying 
the five minute time period if deemed appropriate. 
4. Commence Fire and Cease Fire 
a. No shot shall be fired until the Command for “Commence Firing” is declared by the RSO 
or designated range officer. The Range Safety Lights go out and no one is forward of the 
benches. 
b. All shooting must stop upon the Command for “Cease Fire” is declared to its entirety by 
the RSO or designated range officer. Bolts should be pulled and ECI’s shall be installed 
during this time period. Anyone shooting after the “Cease Fire” Command will be subject 
to disqualification. 
5. Muzzle Position 
a. The muzzle of every firearm, when in a firing position,, shall be forward of the front edge 
of the bench upon which it rests. 
b. The muzzle of a firearm should be facing in a direction consistent with what is 
considered down range and never in the direction of people. 
c. A competitor should focus on restricting his/her fire in the direction and within the 
boundaries of their personal target. 
6. Emergency Commands 
An emergency “Cease Fire” may be declared which requires all shooters to stop shooting 
and clear their firearms, bolts out, and ECI’s installed. Shooters shall remain at their 
bench until “Commence Fire” is declared. One additional minute will be added to each 
shooter’s time. 
7. Sportsmanship 
Disruptive behavior or boisterous conduct must be avoided. Conversations in an area 
where there are active shooters cannot be tolerated. Common courtesy reigns supreme on 
the range and we expect members to observe this concept at all times. Any shooter failing 
to honor this courtesy will be subject to disqualification and further discipline by the RSO 
or designated range officer. 
8. Shooters Down Range 
a. At no time after shooting has commenced will any person, other than range personnel or 
referees under the direction of the RSO, be permitted down range until that range relay 
has been completed. Any shooter violating this safety rule will be subject to 
disqualification by the RSO. Down range means forward of the edge of the benches 
closest to the targets. 
b. In an effort to provide adequate time for practice and scoring relays, shooters down range 
are advised to make every effort to complete their tasks of posting and retrieving targets 
as well as setting up or removing wind flags in a brisk and efficient manner. 
9. Ear and Eye Protection 
Required for all shooters. 

Article IX. Basic Safety Procedures 

1. When approaching a firearm, always assume that the firearm is loaded. 
2. Be aware of where your trigger finger is. 
3. Always control the direction your firearm’s muzzle is facing. 
4. Always know what is between you and your target and what is beyond your target 
5. Slam Fire – 
a. A slam fire is the result of a firearm discharging solely due to its bolt coming to battery 
(closing). 
b. A slam fire is a potentially dangerous firearm malfunction. 
c. A slam fire must be reported to the Range Officer or Range Safety Officer immediately. 
d. If the round discharged by the slam fire hits the intended target, it counts as any fired 
round and is included in the score. 
e. The cause of the slam fire must be corrected before the firearm can be fired again. 
f. The shooter may elect to continue shooting either with the repaired firearm or another 
firearm of the same class. 
 

Article X. Scoring 

1. General 
a. Scoring shall be conducted by the trained scoring committee members in the Range 
Shack. 
b. Scorers shall work in teams of two so that values are checked and confirmed. 
c. Scoring shall be done on the day of the match. 
d. Only scoring committee members are permitted in the Range Shack during scoring. 
e. No one shall score their own target(s). 
f. Posting of the score targets shall be at the discretion of the League Director. 
2. Determining Shot Value 
a. Shots shall be scored by the highest value scoring ring touched by the bullet (“best edge” 
scoring). 
b. A plug-type scoring aid as used in NRA smallbore competition shall be used. 
c. Magnifying lenses shall be used in cases where there is uncertainty of the value of the 
shot. 
d. Shot holes may be only “plugged” once. The plug shall remain in the shot hole until the 
value is determined. 
e. In cases where there are multiple bullets making a single hole making the value of the 
outer shot holes difficult to measure, the scorer will exercise judgment and seek 
confirmation from another scorer as to the value of the outside shots. 
3. Dealing With Crossfires 
a. The range is not equipped with backing targets to determine the origin of any crossfire. 
We rely on an honor system to deal with crossfire 
b. Intentional crossfires on another competitor’s target shall be scored as misses on the 
offending shooter’s target. The RSO , at his/her discretion, may disqualify the offending 
shooter. 
c. If a competitor admits to accidentally crossfiring on another competitor’s target, he/she 
should immediately notify the RSO. The RSO will note the specifics of the accidental 
crossfire, but wait until the end of the relay to determine an outcome. If the offending 
shooter and the offended shooter both agree on which shot is the crossfire, the value shall 
be transferred to the offending shooter’s target and one penalty point assessed. Accidental 
crossfires on sighters shall be brought to the attention of the RSO, but no point penalties 
shall be assessed. 
d. If accidental crossfires appear mysteriously, contact the neighboring shooters 
immediately as well as the RSOs to assess the situation and determine the source. If the 
source cannot be determined, the Scoring Committee “MAY” choose to ignore the 
crossfire. Otherwise, it will be scored as an excessive hit. 
e. Crossfires on the wrong bull shall be assessed and judged by the Scoring Committee to 
determine a value and whether a penalty point shall be assigned. 
4. Dealing With Excessive Hits 
a. Competitors shall receive the value of the lowest shot or 25 shots on their target unless 
the Scoring Committee determines that particular shots resulted from crossfires. (An 
agreement between the shooters involved and the RSO shall be required by the Scoring 
Committee if lowest shot or lowest 25 are not used for the score). 
b. If a competitor crossfires, he/she should “NOT” fire a replacement shot on his/her target. 
He/she should receive the value of the crossfired shot, less the penalty point. Said value 
shall be assigned to the corresponding bull in the competitor’s target. If he/she fires a 
replacement shot, he/she may be: 1) disqualified for attempting to cover up a crossfire (at 
the discretion of the RSO) or 2) the crossfired shot less the penalty point shall be 
considered an excess hit. 
c. If a competitor receives a crossfire, he/she “SHOULD” fire the required number of shots 
in the appropriate bull(s) on his/her target. 
d. If a competitor crossfires on a different type of target than appropriate for his/her class, 
the crossfire shall be scored a miss. 
5. Standard Process For Scoring 25 Bulls 
a. Target, Master Target and Advanced Master Target classes use targets with 25 bulls 
requiring one-shot per bull. 
b. The value of each shot shall be written inside each bull (X, 10, 9, etc). 
c. Do not write “10 X” as it creates confusion (it is either a “10” or an “X”). 
d. Add the values of the 5 shots in each row of bulls. For example, if the shots in one row 
are scored as: 9, 10, X, X, 10, you would write “49” in the margin to the right of that row 
of bulls. 
e. Add the 5 scores in the right-hand margin. Record the total in the “Score” space. 
f. Count the number of bulls containing an “X” and write the total in the “Score” space as 
X’s. Scores thus written should appear like: 246 – 9X, or whatever the score values 
should be. 
6. Standard Process For Scoring 5 Bulls 
a. Open-Iron Sights, and Sporter classes provide targets with 5 bulls requiring 5 shots in 
each bull. 
b. Write the values of the 5 shots within the box containing the bull. To facilitate addition, 
write: X (don’t write “10 X,” just “X”)
c. Add the column in the above example. Draw a line under the bottom number (6). Beneath 
the line write “37 – 1 X” or whatever the values work out to. It is understood that an “X” 
has a score value of 10. 
d. Finally, add the totals for all 5 bulls and post the total in the space provided in the same 
format used for the 25 bull targets. 
7. Posting Scores and Targets 
a. Following the day’s shooting, the Scoring Committee shall compile and secure scores for 
all competitors on a computerized system. Scores and targets shall be made available for 
viewing in the PTRC clubhouse after the Scoring Committee has completed their work. 
b. At the beginning of the season, the Statistical Officer shall provide a form to the Scoring 
Committee that records and reports scores for individual matches. 
c. The Statistical Officer shall be given the compilation of scores after a reasonable period 
for protests (see Article X. Protests) has passed. He/she shall compute the rankings and 
continue to update seasonal scores and post via e-mail within the week to all participating 
members. 
8. Breaking Ties 
a. Ties for individual matches shall be broken in the following criteria sequence: 
• X count 
• Value of score in first bull regardless of order actually fired (X beats a 10, 
10 beats a 9, etc.) 
• Value of second bull score, etc. 
• The Statistical Officer shall break ties for the first three places in any class. 
b. Ties for league standing at the end of the season shall be broken in the following criteria 
sequence: 
• X count 
• Of the 10 best targets, the shooter with the greatest number of 250’s. 
• Of the 10 best targets, the shooter with the greatest number of 249’s, etc. 
• The Statistical Officer shall break ties for the first five places. 
 

Article XI. Protests 

1. Time Line 
a. Targets will be made available to shooters in the clubhouse by the Scoring Committee 
after each match. 
b. Once targets are posted or displayed at the clubhouse, shooters may inspect them and 
consider the following: 
1) If a shooter is satisfied with his/her target score, they may then 
remove the target from the clubhouse. Once removed from the 
clubhouse, the target score shall be considered final. 
2) A shooter may also declare a protest while inspecting his/her target at 
the clubhouse. 
3) Because RFL targets aren’t officially posted for public viewing, no 
shooter is permitted to protest or challenge another shooter’s target. 
c. Scores (values and arithmetic) must be protested before targets are removed 
from the clubhouse by the competitor. Simple errors may be resolved immediately.
Protested target scores become final upon resolution of the protest 
d. Protested target scores become final upon resolution of the protest. 
2. Protest Criteria 
a. The Statistical Officer shall have the final say on the outcome of a protest. The 
Statistical Officer may consult with other members of the Scoring Committee or the 
League Director prior to rendering a decision. The League Director shall have the 
final say should the Statistical Officer’s target be involved. 
b. When a serious and obvious error has been made such as mistakes in transcription, 
addition or scoring off by an entire ring, corrections shall be made. 
c. Challenges concerning scorer’s judgment requiring plugging holes shall not be 
granted. 
d. Exceptions for shooters who must leave the range before targets are available for 
inspection due to personal reasons will be determined on a case-by-case basis. 
e. If a member removes a target from the clubhouse for another member, that target 
score is considered final. 
f. Every effort will be made by the League Director to collect and secure all unclaimed 
score targets prior to his/her departure from the clubhouse. 
g. These unclaimed score targets will be available for shooter inspection during the 
following Monday match. Under these conditions, a shooter protest must be declared 
prior to the end of Scoring Relay 2 for that evening. The final decision concerning 
the protested score target will be available that evening. 
h. Club officials have the right to discard any unclaimed score targets carried over from 
the previous week, especially if the participating member or the League Director 
wasn’t available. 
a. Any competitor may request the RSO to call for an inspection, but it is the RSO’s 
option. 
b. If the Rules Committee Chairman is unavailable, the Chief Range Master will either 
conduct the inspection or select a Range Safety Officer to conduct the inspection. 
c. The ruling of the Rules Committee Chairman or designee shall be final. 
d. If equipment is found to be non-compliant, the shooter will be given the opportunity to 
make the equipment compliant before that day’s target is fired. 
e. Any target fired with non-compliant equipment on the day of the ruling shall be 
disqualified. Previous days scores shall stand. 
f. Minor infractions, such as a flag an inch too high, may be ignored if judged irrelevant 
to the match outcome or other competitor’s score. 
3. Protests and Enforcement: Firearms and Equipment 
The RSO may at his/her discretion request the Rules Committee Chairman to inspect any 
firearm or equipment. 
Changes: 
1) Names of current office holders for League Director and Chief Range Officer added. 
2) Article III 1. Advanced Class removed. Word “rifle” replaced with “firearm.” 
3) Article VII 8. Detailed schedule added. VII 7j replaced by VII 8. 
4) Article XIII 9. Eye and ear protection now REQUIRED for all shooters. (penalty?) 
5) Safety – elevated to “Article level.” See new Article IX. Following article numbers changed accordingly. 
6) Slam Fire verbiage added to the new article IX. 



